To the IMS Award Committee:

As a previous winner of the IMS Thelma and Marvin Zelen Emerging Women Leaders in Data Science Award award in 2025, I have the distinct pleasure of nominating Dr. Jean Feng---an Associate Professor in the Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics at the University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) and the UCSF-UC Berkeley Joint Program in Computational Precision Health---for this same award for the 2027 cycle. From my perspective, Dr. Feng uniquely emblemizes the spirit of this award: she is one of very few researchers who not only combines deep statistical methods with frontier Artificial Intelligence (AI) models but also develops, validates, and deploys real-world clinical AI tools to improve healthcare for all. As an Associate Professor of Biostatistics at the University of Michigan and now a collaborator of Dr. Feng, I have had the privilege of witnessing firsthand her contributions and leadership in bridging these fields.

Dr. Feng is a leader in leveraging statistics and AI to fundamentally enhance one another, publishing in top venues for both fields (AOAS, Biometrics, ICML, NeurIPS, AISTATS). As illustrations of her work, she has established fundamental statistical limits for the common (but partially flawed) practice of using Large Language Models (LLMs) as a judge, developed hypothesis testing frameworks for diagnosing performance decay of AI models, introduced statistical inference procedures and packages for model-agnostic variable importance measures suitable for complex AI systems, and developed Bayesian procedures that can leverage LLM priors to learn parsimonious interpretable prediction models with unstructured input data. Her work has received accolades from the both communities, including selection as a Discussion paper in statistical journals and selection for Oral Presentations at AI conferences (top 10% or higher of accepted submissions).

Dr. Feng's research impact at the intersection of biostatistics and clinical AI is arguably even higher, with publications at top venues including Nature Medicine, npj Digital Medicine, and NEJM AI. She established the causal foundations for analyzing and monitoring AI systems deployed in real-world clinical settings, a critical research area given the growing number of AI-based medical devices and clinical decision support tools that have been approved by the FDA. Until the publication of her work, this area lacked rigorous statistical methods for formalizing the complex dynamics in this setting. Her highly cited review on monitoring clinical AI systems using procedures from statistical process control (npj Digital Medicine 2022) has become a standard reference in the literature. Consequently, her work has been cited by AI governance groups and led to numerous presentations to medical regulatory agencies, both in the US and around the world.

Beyond methodological development, Dr. Feng is also a leader in AI development, validation, and deployment for safety-net hospitals. She is a co-founder and technical lead of the data science arm of the Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital (ZSFG), the safety-net hospital for the city of San Francisco. The AI workflow developed by her group has reduced unplanned readmission rates overall,  equity gaps in readmission rates, and overall mortality rates; this work has translated to saving the hospital $7.2 million of at-risk pay-for-performance funding. In parallel to AI application development, Dr. Feng also spearheads research in the group, which has led to work describing best practices for aligning AI agents in resource-constrained settings (AJMC), describing patient perspectives of AI in the safety-net setting (JAMIA Open), and quantifying the importance of Social Determinants of Health (American Journal of Medicine Open). Her team organized the first AI symposium for Safety-Net Hospitals and received numerous awards including from The Joint Commission and the California Association of Public Hospitals and Health Systems Safety Net Institute. Dr. Feng has been also invited to speak at various venues to share and disseminate their learnings from deploying AI in safety-net systems, including top clinical AI venues such as ACM CHIL and MLHC.

Dr. Feng's leadership in statistics, ML/AI, and clinical AI is reflected in the prominent roles she plays across all three communities. In the statistics community, she serves as Guest Editor at Biostatistics for a special collection on "Statistical Foundations of AI and Real-World Evidence Generation" and as Area Chair for STAI-X (Statistics and Trustworthy AI for Cross-Domain Acceleration), a new conference accelerating statistical developments in AI. In the AI community, she serves as Area Chair for NeurIPS, the premier conference in AI/ML. In the clinical AI community, she serves as Statistical Editor of NEJM AI and as an organizer for the Symposium on Artificial Intelligence in Learning Health Systems (SAIL), where she received the 2026 Service Award.

Dr. Feng is dedicated to mentoring the next generation of leaders in statistical AI. She mentors faculty at multiple career stages, including both junior statistical faculty and clinical AI faculty. She is also committed to promoting equity and diversity in the field. She is a guest lecturer for UCSF's AI4ALL Summer program and was a guest speaker at Kode with Klossy Summer Coding Camp, both of which are nonprofits that encourage young students from underrepresented groups (e.g., females) to enter data science. I have also benefited personally---when I asked Dr. Feng how how statisticians can be more involved in clinical AI research, she generously involved me in research projects on AI scribes. Through this, I have come to appreciate the rigorous demands that Dr. Feng places on research to be methodologically rigorous, applicable to real-world data, and relevant to current needs.

Finally, in reaching out to other researchers in this space, I have received enthusiastic support for this nomination:

...QUOTES HERE?...

Dr. Jean Feng exemplifies the qualities this award seeks to recognize. She has made substantial contributions to data science methodology, demonstrated outstanding leadership in both the statistics and AI communities, and shown exceptional commitment to mentoring and diversity. Her work addresses one of the most critical challenges of our time: ensuring that AI systems in healthcare are reliable, equitable, and beneficial. I give her my strongest recommendation for the IMS Thelma and Marvin Zelen Emerging Women Leaders in Data Science Award.

Sincerely,

Xu Shi, PhD
Associate Professor of Biostatistics
University of Michigan